# Incident Report - DNS

A short incident report derived from the analysis of data from a packet sniffer that captured data packets in transit to and from the company web server. This report was part of the coursework for the Google Cybersecurity Professional Certificate.

### Scenario

You work as a security analyst for a travel agency that advertises sales and promotions on the company’s website. The employees of the company regularly access the company’s sales webpage to search for vacation packages their customers might like. 

One afternoon, you receive an automated alert from your monitoring system indicating a problem with the web server. You attempt to visit the company’s website, but you receive a connection timeout error message in your browser.

You use a packet sniffer to capture data packets in transit to and from the web server. You notice a large number of TCP SYN requests coming from an unfamiliar IP address. The web server appears to be overwhelmed by the volume of incoming traffic and is losing its ability to respond to the abnormally large number of SYN requests. You suspect the server is under attack by a malicious actor. 

You take the server offline temporarily so that the machine can recover and return to a normal operating status. You also configure the company’s firewall to block the IP address that was sending the abnormal number of SYN requests. You know that your IP blocking solution won’t last long, as an attacker can spoof other IP addresses to get around this block. You need to alert your manager about this problem quickly and discuss the next steps to stop this attacker and prevent this problem from happening again. You will need to be prepared to tell your boss about the type of attack you discovered and how it was affecting the web server and employees.

## Identification
The logs show that a large number of TCP SYN requests coming from an unfamiliar IP address. In turn, all of these requests are overwhelming the web server and it is not able to respond to the aberrant number of SYN requests. It appears likely that this is a specific type of DOS attack, SYN flooding.

## Explanation

When website visitors try to establish a connection with the web server, a three-way handshake occurs using the TCP protocol. The three steps of the handshake are:
1. A SYN packet with a randomly generated sequence number is sent from the source to the destination requesting to connect 

2.  The destination replies to the source with the SYN-ACK packet to accept the connection request. This packet will contain a new sequence number that is randomly generated. It also contains an acknowledgment number which is the sequence number generated by the source incremented by 1.

3. The final ACK packet is sent from the source to the destination acknowledging the permission to connect. The packet will contain the sequence sent by the destination incremented by 1.

During a SYN flood atack, a malicious actor will send a large number of SYN packets simultaneously. This rapidly burns through the server's available resources  to reserve for the connection. As as result, there are no server resource remaining for legitimate TCP connection requests. Here, the log data is consistent with a SYN flood attack: the web server appears to have burned through all of its resources to process all the SYN requests from a particular singular unfamiliar IP addresss. The web server has no resources left to open any new connections to new visitors, thus new visitors keep receiving a connection timeout error message instead.

## Mitigation Strategies

The most straight forward defense has already been utilized here to some benefit: denying specific IP addresses. Although this measure would likely not a be a permanent solution against a more sophisticated atatcker who could spoof a new IP address and resume the DOS attack from there.

Rate limiting may also be a solution to consider. This is when the amount of traffic to specific network interface controller (NIC) is limited. This can be done on the hardware and the software level as well. Rate limiting could be implemented on switches and routers presuming this company's hardware hvee those capabilities. Limiting the number of API calls (where applicable) for a visitor ont the web server over a specific duration (*e.g. 60 requests per minute). However, the issue still remains that the router itself could still be overwhelmed and a victim of DOS attack and go down.

Lastly, upstream filtering through a provider like Cloudflare can also provide strong protection against DoS requests so that the requests are filtered out before it reaches the target network.
